==========
Spiderlets
==========

.. warning::

   This functionality is experimental and its API may undergo changes from time
   to time. Use at your own risk and please contribute feedback to make it
   stable.


The slybot spider alone is not able to solve all the crawling and extraction difficulties that may arise for every possible case: data
presented in a way partially or not suitable for the similarity algorithm, arbitrary post data and ajax requests, complex url 
normalization not handled by an addon, etc. Spiderlets are a method to extend any AS spider in a way that everything it is possible
to do with a normal scrapy spider, can be done with a spiderlet.

Spiderlets are handled by a spider middleware. In order to be enabled, the setting ``SPIDERLETS_MODULE`` must be present, with the
value being the module name that contains the spiderlets submodules. For example, if your spiderlets are in the module
``mylib.spiderlets``, then you set the value of ``SPIDERLETS_MODULE`` to ``mylib.spiderlets``.

What is a spiderlet
___________________

A spiderlet is an instance of a python class which implements at least one of the predefined methods described below. In order to
attach a spiderlet to a given spider, you use the class attribute ``name``. The value of this attribute must match the name of the
spider:

::

    class MySpiderlet:
        name = "myspider"

        def process_request(self, request, response):
            ...
            return request

        def process_item(self, item, response):
            ...
            return item

        def process_start_request(self, request):
            ...
            return request

        def parse_login_page(self, response):
            ...
            return request


Three of the methods, ``process_request``, ``process_item`` and ``process_start_request``, are attached to the output of the
autoscraping spider. The autoscraping spider generates two kind of objects: a request or an item. And depending on the kind
of object generated and the source, the spiderlet addon passes it to one or another method of your spiderlet. So, each item
issued by the spider is passed to ``process_item``, and each request is passed to ``process_start_request`` or ``process_request``,
depending on the source: a start url, or a request generated by the spider as a consequence of a link extraction from a received
response. Starting requests usually need to be processed in a different way, and they don't have an associated response from which
they were generated.

``process_request`` and ``process_start_request`` are commonly used for normalize request url, filter it, or override the request
callback (eventually defined as a new method of the spiderlet). The default callback for every request generated by the spider is
the ``parse`` method of the autoscraping spider. Whenever you need to generate a FormRequest for sending post
data or simulating an AJAX call, you will need to create your own callbacks in the spiderlet and point the request callbacks to them.

``process_item`` is mostly used for item post processing. An important feature is that the values of the item fields returned by the
autoscraping spider are always lists, even if it is single valued. So you have to consider this fact when you are accessing the item
fields inside the ``process_item`` method. There is no restriction, however, on the types of data contained in the items returned by the
spiderlet.

The fourth method, ``parse_login_page``, is of a different kind. Instead of process an output from the spider, it process an
incoming response, and it is applied only to those responses which its callback is the ``parse_login_page`` method of the autoscraping
spider. If you define ``parse_login_page`` method in your spiderlet, the request callback will be overridden by this new one. This
feature allows to write your own login handler when the slybot default one (based on the generic solution implemented in the
`loginforms library <https://github.com/scrapy/loginform>`_) does not fit well for a given case.

Another very practical feature of a spiderlet is that you can access the autoscraping spider methods and attributes with the spiderlet
attribute ``self.spider``. ``self.spider.log`` or ``self.spider.parse`` are among the most commonly methods needed to be accessed from
the spiderlet.

